#summary Release notes for the 1.2 version of libkml

= Introduction =

Welcome to the "1.2" release of libkml! 

It is the intention of libkml to adhere strictly to the OGC KML 2.2 standard. 

= What is libkml? =

This is a library to parse, serialize and programmatically access a KML
document object model (DOM). The main API is C++, and there are Swig
bindings to Python and Java.

= Who uses libkml? =

We do! We regularly process the millions of KML files crawled by Google using
this software.  We verify correctness of the KML we publish as Google Earth
layers using libkml.  Quite a number of groups within Google use libkml to
parse, create and process KML.

= Licensing =

The libkml software is distributed under the New BSD license, whose text is
found at the top of each file.

= Supported platforms =

This library has been compiled and tested on Windows XP, Mac OS X 10.4 and
10.5, and various flavors of Linux.

= Changes since 1.1 =

  * Replaced use of `std::string` with `string` to permit direct use in codebases that have their own (STL-compatible) string implementation
  * Replaced use of `char*` and `XML_Char*` with string in the low-level wrapper around Expat
  * Improved Google Maps and Spreadsheets Data API support

= Building and installing libkml =

See the wiki page for BuildingAndInstalling. 

= Reference =

See the [Reference Reference].

= Future development =

Some TODO items in the near future may include:

  * Continued Google Maps Data API support
  * Upgrade of dependent libraries
  * Singleton deleter
  * Improve SWIG support


= Found a bug? =

You can file a bug using this project's
[http://code.google.com/p/libkml/issues/list issue tracker]. Please follow
basic [http://www.google.com/search?q=bug+reporting+guidelines bug reporting
procedure] and provide as much information as possible.